# Tie Resolution

This repository contains documentation for the protocol used by POLYAS to
resolve tie conditions in a verifiably pseudo-random manner. It also includes
a reference implementation of the tie-resolution verification algorithm, which
verifies the correctness of the tie-resolution results produced by the POLYAS
system.

A *tie condition* occurs when two or more candidates or choices receive an
equal number of votes in a ballot or a list. In such cases, a resolution
mechanism may be required to randomly order these entities.  The primary
objective of the described protocol is to ensure that the resolution order is
in fact *pseudo-random* (the outcome is unpredictable and uniformly
distributed), *fair* (neither the POLYAS system nor the election council can
manipulate the outcome to favor specific candidates), and *verifiable* (it
can be audited to ensure the above conditions).

To achieve this, POLYAS employs a method that combines two sources of
randomness: one generated by the POLYAS system and one provided by the
election council.  These two sources are combined to determine the resolution
order. To guarantee fairness, the POLYAS system *commits* to its random value
before the election board representative provides their randomness.


## Content of this repository:

 * [**Detailed documentation of the tie resolution protocol** 
    (markdown)](tie-resolution.md)

 * [**An example implementation of the tie-resolution verifier** (Python)](py)

   The provided implementation can be used by an auditor to assert that
   the result of the tie resolution process, as output by the POLYAS
   system, follows the specified protocol and is therefore fair.

